---
layout: post
title:  "Chemistry I - LM 22"
date:   2015-06-26
categories: chemistry
permalink: /chemistry/lm-22/
---

##LEARNING MODULE 22 – Molecular Orbital Theory – Guided Reading Activity

---

What can molecular orbital calculations tell us about molecules?

MO calculations can predict geometries: giving the relative positions of atoms within the molecule such that you can determine bond lengths, bond strengths, and bond angles

---

Mathematically the MO quantum mechanical calculations give:

A set of orbitals and energies in which the electrons of all the atoms within the molecule can be found.

---

To calculate the lowest energy molecular orbitals:

The quantum mechanical calculations are repeated moving the atoms with various bond lengths, strengths and angles until the minimum energy is achieved. This set of lowest energy molecular orbitals is then the suggested set for the molecule. The electrons are then filled form lowest to highest energy. From there, the bond order and magnetism can be predicted.

---

Look at the potential energy diagram under the Molecular Geometry tab. The diagram is for diatomic molecular hydrogen. State here the labels for the x and y-axis.

The y-axis is the potential energy of the system. The minimum of the curve is the minimum potential energy of the system. The x-axis is the inter-nuclear distance between the two atoms. The x value that corresponds with the y-min is the optimum inter-nuclear distance and is considered to be the bond length.

---

Referring to the MO and Hydrogen Molecule tab. Sketch the MO diagram here. Label the atomic orbitals, the bonding MO and the anti-bonding MO. Explain why you see 4 arrows in this diagram and the significance of each arrow. State the origin of the bonding MO versus the anti-bonding MO.

MO1 is the bonding orbital.  
MO2 is and anti-bonding orbital.  
1 arrow is the 1s electron for one atom of H (labeled A in this diagram), the other is the electron originating from the other H (labeled B in this diagram). Then, the 2 arrows in the bonding MO originate from the atoms (A&B). The Bonding MOs arise mathematically from the constructive addition of the atomic wave functions while the Anti- Bonding MOs arise from the destructive addition of the atomic wave functions.  

---

Bonding orbitals have ___lower___ energy than the atomic orbitals from which they are formed.

---

Anti-Bonding orbitals have ___higher___ energy than the atomic orbitals from which they are formed.

---

In the context of MO theory, a sigma bond is a ___end to end or head to head___ overlap of atomic orbitals showing where there is a high probability of finding electrons between atoms.

---

The anti-bonding orbitals are also ___end to end or head to head___ overlap, but in this case the overlap is destructive, so there is no probability of finding the electrons in the place directly between the atoms because the overlap results in a ___node___.

---

The bond order predicts the number of bonds that should be found in a molecule based on the calculated molecular orbitals and the total number of electrons in the molecule. Write the equation for calculating bond order.

___BO = 1⁄2(# Bonding electrons - # Anti-bonding electrons)___

---

Using the MO energy diagrams given for common diatomics, calculate the bond order for B2. What does this value tell you about the stability of that particular diatomic.

In this case B has 5 electrons. So, if you fill in the 10 electrons that exist in this diatomic from lowest to highest on the MO Energy level diagram you end up with 6 bonding electrons and 4 anti-bonding electrons. So, the BO = 1⁄2(6-2) = 1. So you predict that this diatomic could form with a single bond.

---

Paramagnetic compounds (and atoms) are ___attracted to___/from magnetic fields, while diamagnetic compounds (and atoms) are ___repelled___ to/___from___ magnetic fields.

---

Label and define HOMO and LUMO on the following diagram.

The HOMO is the σ2p. The LUMO is the π2p*. HOMO stands for Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital and LUMO stands for Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital.

---






