---
layout: post
title:  "Chemistry I - Unit 3 Exam"
date:   2015-06-25
categories: chemistry
permalink: /chemistry/unit-3-exam/
---

Select the FALSE statement about compounds with octahedral geometries.

1. The central atom in compounds with octahedral geometries always obey the octet rule. **correct**
2. Compounds with octahedral geometries do not have eight atoms bonded to the central atom.
3. Octahedral electronic geometries may have four atoms bonded to the central atom.
4. If a compound has a square planar molecular geometry, it corresponds to an octahedral electronic geometry.
5. Angles in compounds with octahedral molecular geometries are typically 90 and 180 degrees.
6. Octahedral molecular geometries always require sp3d2 hybridizations.

**Explanation:**  
Compounds with octahedral geometries have expanded valence shells. These are exceptions to the octet rule.

---

SO2−4 is more/less polar than SO2−3 because

1. more; the tetrahedral geometry increases the polarity of S -- O bonds
2. more; it has four polar S -- O bonds rather than three polar S -- O bonds.
3. less; the four polar S -- O bonds in SO2−4 are symmetrical and cancel the dipole moments. **correct**
4. less; it is a resonance structure.
5. more; the four polar S -- O bonds in SO2−4 are arranged non-symmetrically leaving
a net dipole moment.

**Explanation:**   
SO2−4 has no lone pairs on the central S atom. It has tetrahedral molecular geometry. Each bond angle is 109.5◦. The dipole moments cancel and the molecule is non-polar.  
SO2−3 has one lone pair on the central S atom. It has pyramidal molecular geometry. The bond angles are not equal so the dipole moments cannot cancel. This molecule is polar.

---

For which of the following is the type of solid INCORRECTLY given?

1. C6H6, molecular solid
2. KF, ionic solid
3. H2O, molecular solid
4. Ni, metallic solid
5. CsI, covalent solid **correct**

**Explanation:**  
CsI is an ionic solid. An ionic bond is a bond between a cation 􏰀Cs+1􏰁 and an anion
􏰀I−1􏰁.

---

A substance has a melting point of 1200 K. It conducts electricity while melting but not in the solid. This substance would be classified as

1. a metallic solid.
2. an ionic solid. **correct**
3. a covalent network solid.
4. a hydrogen bonded solid.
5. a molecular solid.

**Explanation:**  
Ionic solids are held together by electrostatic attractions between cations and anions. In a melted phase, the ions can move and therefore can carry current.

---

Consider the molecule CF4.

1. It has four non-polar bonds and is a non-polar molecule.
2. It has four polar bonds and is a polar molecule.
3. It has four anti-bonds and is a polar bear.
4. It has four non-polar bonds and is a polar molecule.
5. It has four polar bonds and is a non-polar molecule. **correct**

**Explanation:**  
Fluorine has a very high electronegativity when compared to carbon. A covalent bond between two molecules with such different electronegativities is polar. The molecular geometry of the molecule CF4 is tetrahedral, and all the bonds have an equal dipole moment since they are all between the same atoms (C and F). The net dipole of the molecule is zero since all of the individual dipoles cancel each other out. A molecule with no net dipole moment is non-polar.

---

If a molecule of AB2 has 2 lone pairs of electrons on A, what would you expect the B-A-B angle to be closest to?

1. 62.5 degrees
2. 109.5 degrees **correct**
3. 90 degrees
4. 120 degrees

**Explanation:**  
This molecule fits the general formula AB2U2. These structures, which have 4 regions of high electron density, have tetrahedral electronic geometries, and they have bond angles close to 109.5 degrees.

---

What structural feature makes unsaturated fats less rigid than saturated fats?

1. Unsaturated fats have weaker covalent bonds along the chain; weaker covalent bonds result in reduced rigidity.
2. Unsaturated fats have a bend that reduces the strength and number of dispersion forces between molecules. **correct**
3. The statement is untrue; saturated fats are more rigid because their C-C bond lengths are shorter and stronger than for unsaturated fats.
4. The statement is untrue; saturated fats are more rigid because of their higher molecular weight.

**Explanation:**  
Unsaturated fats have at least one double bond. Along the fatty acid chain, there is a bend at each double bond. (Imagine an elbow.) Packing of such fats is less dense at the molecular level, and fewer dispersion forces are possible. This results in a less rigid substance.

---


The bonding in metals like tin and lead is best described as (localized, delocalized) whereas the bonding in insulators or semiconductors (such as diamond or silicon) is best described as (localized, delocalized).

1. delocalized; localized **correct**
2. localized; localized
3. delocalized; delocalized
4. localized; delocalized

**Explanation:**  
Metallic solids are solids composed of metal atoms that are held together by metallic bonds. These bonds are like huge molecular orbitals that span across the whole solid. Electrons are not just held between a few of atoms in a sigma bond. Rather, there is a sea of electrons everywhere. In covalent, molecular, and ionic solids, electrons are localized in bonds between atoms.

---

Use VSEPR theory to predict the shape of the molecule SeF6.

1. linear
2. None of these
3. bent or angular
4. trigonal-pyramidal
5. tetrahedral
6. trigonal-bipyramidal
7. octahedral **correct**
8. trigonal-planar

---

Which of the following are important contributions that MO theory makes to chemistry.

I. The ability to use MO theory with a computer to calculate the minimum energy geometry of a molecule.  
II. The ability to predict the energy at which a molecule will absorb light.  
III. The ability to predict whether or not a molecule should be paramagnetic or diamagnetic.  

1. only I
2. I and II
3. I, II, and III **correct**
4. only II
5. none of them
6. II and III

**Explanation:**  
The MO theory is a powerful theory that, based on Quantum mechanical calculations, and with the help of a powerful computer, can very quickly calculate the energies of electrons in a small or large molecule as the relative positions of the atoms of the molecule are moved relative to each other. This iterative calculation results in the lowest energy arrangement of all the atoms and all the electrons of the atoms in the molecule, thus leading to the prediction of the most likely arrangement of the atoms and electrons. Therefore, the shape, magnetism (pair or unpaired electrons residing in orbitals), and the energy difference of the HOMO and LUMO can be calculated.

---

Which of the following combinations of hybridization and molecular geometry is not possible?

1. sp3; tetrahedral
2. sp2; angular
3. sp3d; linear
4. sp3d2; octahedral
5. sp3d2; angular **correct**
6. sp3; angular

**Explanation:**  
Angular molecular geometries can only be formed from sp2 and sp3 hybridizations.

---

A molecule with tetrahedral geometry must be nonpolar.

1. False **correct**
2. True

---

Which molecular geometries can stem from tetrahedral electronic geometry?

1. trigonal pyramidal, seesaw
2. tetrahedral, trigonal bipyramidal, linear, angular, seesaw
3. tetrahedral, trigonal pyramidal, angular **correct**
4. only tetrahedral
5. tetrahedral, T-shaped, linear

**Explanation:**  
Tetrahedral, trigonal pyramidal and angular are three molecular geometries that can stem from tetrahedral electronic geometry.

---

Which of the following molecules is incorrectly matched with molecular geometry?

1. NH3 : tetrahedral **correct**
2. H2O : angular
3. AsF5 : trigonal bipyramidal
4. TeF6 : octahedral
5. SiF4 : tetrahedral

**Explanation:**  
The *electronic* geometry of NH3 is tetrahedral, but its *molecular* geometry is trigonal pyramidal.

---

Which represents a false statement?

1. All molecules with four regions of electron density have sp3 hybridization.
2. The sp2 hybridization corresponds to trigonal planar electronic arrangements.
3. All square planar molecules have octahedral electronic arrangements.
4. All angular molecules are sp2 hybridized. **correct**

**Explanation:**  
Angular molecules can be sp2 or sp3 hybridized.

---

What are all of the intermolecular forces that are responsible for the existence of ice?

1. dipole-dipole and London forces
2. dipole-dipole and ion-ion
3. hydrogen bonding and dipole-dipole
4. London forces
5. dipole-dipole, London forces, and hydrogen bonding **correct**

**Explanation:**  
Ice is solid H2O. This molecule exhibits dispersion. Because it is polar it also exhibits dipole-dipole interactions. Finally because of the H bonded to the electronegative O atom it also exhibits hydrogen bonding; this polar bond can orient and interact with the lone pair of an O atom on another H2O molecule.

---

Which of the following molecules would be expected to have the lowest boiling point?

1. C2H6
2. C12H26
3. C8H18
4. CH4 **correct**
5. C16H34

**Explanation:**  
These molecules are all very similar in that they are made up only of hydrogen and carbon. They are all covalently bonded, nonpolar, and cannot form hydrogen bonds. Therefore the only intermolecular force that attracts these molecules to each other are dispersion forces. Dispersion forces are generally stronger for molecules that have more electrons or are larger, so you would predict that the smallest molecule in this group (CH4) would have the weakest intermolecular forces and thus would have the lowest boiling point.

---

A molecule with a central atom and two bonded atoms is bent with a bond angle of 117◦. Assuming the central atom satisfies the octet rule, how many lone pairs does it have?

1. 3 lone pairs
2. 1 lone pair **correct**
3. 2 lone pairs
4. 0 lone pairs
5. 4 lone pairs

**Explanation:**  
Only a molecule with two singly bonded atoms and one lone pair (a pair of nonbonding electrons) would satisfy all of the constraints laid out in the problem, most notably the bond angle which implies trigonal planar geometry and thus 3 regions of high electron density (RHED). Since two of these are atoms, the third must be a lone pair. Example: NOH.

---

Which of the following has the highest vapor pressure?

1. CH3CH2OH
2. CH3CH2COOH
3. CH3CH2OCH2CH3 **correct**
4. CH3OH
5. H2O

**Explanation:**  
The compound with the highest vapor pressure will be the one that most readily evaporates (the one with the weakest intermolecular forces). All of the choices exhibit London (van der Waals) forces and are also polar, so they can exhibit dipole-dipole interactions. However, unlike the other choices, CH3CH2OCH2CH3 does not have O -- H bonds and so cannot exhibit hydrogen bonding. Although CH3CH2OCH2CH3 is the largest molecule, the higher London forces are not strong enough to counteract the lack of hydrogen bonding so overall it has the weakest intermolecular forces.

---

