---
layout: post
title:  "Chemistry I - Unit 2 Exam"
date:   2015-06-24
categories: chemistry
permalink: /chemistry/unit-2-exam/
---

Which of the following statements is true regarding electromagnetic radiation?

1. Electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of 400 nm has a frequency that is lower than that with a wavelength of 600 nm.
2. Electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of 400 nm travels faster than that with a wavelength of 600 nm.
3. Electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of 600 nm travels faster than that with a wavelength of 400 nm.
4. Electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of 600 nm has a frequency that is lower than that with a wavelength of 400 nm. **correct**
5. The frequency of electromagnetic radiation determines how fast it travels.

**Explanation:**  
v=fλ, so λ=1. Higher wavelengths correspond to lower frequencies, and vice versa.

---

What is the frequency of a 500 nm photon?

1. 9.0 × 10^−17 Hz
2. 15 Hz
3. 4.0 × 10^−7 Hz
4. 5.0 × 10^−6 Hz
5. 1.5 × 10^−16 Hz
6. 6.0 × 10^14 Hz **correct**

**Explanation:**  
frequency = speed of light / wavelength = 3e8 / 500e-9 = 6e14

---

Which color in the rainbow has the shortest wavelength?

1. green
2. blue **correct**
3. orange
4. red
5. yellow

**Explanation:**  
Ordered by wavelengths,
blue < green < yellow < orange < red

---

An orbital with n = 4 and l = 2 would be described as

1. 4s.
2. 2p.
3. 4d. **correct**
4. 2s.
5. 4p.

**Explanation:**  
l = 2 refers to the d orbital, so the orbital is 4d.

---

Rank the following species from smallest to largest atomic radius: K, Mg, Rb, Ca.

1. Mg < Rb < K < Ca
2. Mg < Ca < Rb < K
3. Mg < K < Ca < Rb
4. Mg < Ca < K < Rb **correct**
5. Rb < K < Ca < Mg

**Explanation:**  
Atomic radii increase down and to the left.

---

When two H atoms are brought together from large distances they can make H2. As the bond begins to form, the force between the atoms becomes more (attractive, repulsive) and the potential energy (increases, stays the same, decreases).

1. attractive; increases
2. attractive; decreases **correct**
3. attractive; stays the same
4. repulsive; increases
5. repulsive; decreases
6. repulsive; stays the same

---

In a pure covalent bond, electrons are

1. uncharged.
2. shared equally. **correct**
3. transferred.
4. shared unequally.

---

In which compound is the bond the LEAST polar?

1. HCl
2. HBr
3. HF
4. HI **correct**

---

The number of single bonds, double bonds, triple bonds, and unshared (lone) pairs on the central atom in the sulfite ion (SO 2− 3) is


1. 3,0,0,1 **correct**
2. 2,1,0,0
3. 1,1,0,2
4. 1,2,0,1
5. 2,1,0,1

**Explanation:**  
To draw the dot structure for SO2−3 we must first calculate the number of valence electrons available from the atoms:

A = 6 × 1 (S atom) + 6 × 3 (O atoms) + 2 (from −2 charge)  
= 26 e−  

We choose the least electronegative element as the central atom (sulfur in this case) and place the other atoms symmetrically around it.  
The correct dot structure for the molecule should show a complete octet (8 electrons) around each atom and a total of 26 valence electrons for the entire structure.  
(If using the S = N − A rule to determine the dot structure, N = (8×1)+(8×3) = 32 e− and S = 32−26 = 6 e−. This would indicate 3 bonds and correspond to the structure shown above.)

---

The carbon and oxygen in carbon monoxide (CO) are joined by what type of bond or bonds?

1. two double bonds
2. one triple bond **correct**
3. one single bond
4. one double bond
5. four single bonds

**Explanation:**  
The total number of valence electrons is  
C 1×4e−= 4e−  
O 1×6e−= 6e−  
10 e−  
and the Lewis dot structure is :C≣O:  
The 3 lines represent a triple bond between the C and O.

---

Draw the Lewis electron dot structure for SO3. What is the total number of lone pairs of electrons on the three oxygen atoms?

1. 5
2. 3
3. 7
4. 8 **correct**
5. 9

**Explanation:**  
To draw the dot structure for SO3 we must first calculate the number of valence electrons available from the atoms:

A = 6 × 1(S atom) + 6 × 3(O atoms) = 24 e−

We choose the least electronegative element as the central atom (sulfur in this case) and place the other atoms symmetrically around it.  
The correct dot structure for the molecule should show a complete octet (8 electrons) around each atom and a total of 24 valence electrons for the entire structure.  
(If using the S = N − A rule to determine thedotstructure,N =8×1+8×3=32e− and S = 32−24 = 8 e−. This would indicate 4 bonds and correspond to the structure shown above.)

---

Which one of the following compounds does NOT obey the octet rule?

1. CH4
2. BF3 **correct**
3. NaCl
4. H2O

---

How many lone pairs are on the central atom of AsF5?

1. 4
2. 0 **correct**
3. 1
4. 2
5. 3

---

The chemical formula for potassium sulfate is

1. K3(SO4)2
2. KSO4
3. K(SO4)2
4. K2SO4 **correct**

**Explanation:**  
K+ and SO2−4 forms K2SO4:  
2(+1) + 1(−2) = 0

---

For an ionic compound, the lattice energy is the energy associated with

1. generating the ionic compound from the neutral elements
2. dissolving the compound in water to form aqueous ions.
3. moving a pair of ions to infinite separa- tion.
4. breaking up the solid crystal into gas phase ions. **correct**

**Explanation:**  
The lattice energy is the energy associated with taking the ions from the solid crystalline structure and separating them into ions in the gas phase. The energy associated with simply separating two isolated ions is the Coulomb energy. The energy for dissolving the compound to for aqueous ions is the enthalpy of solution. And the energy for forming the ionic compound from neutral elements is the enthalpy of formation.

---

Consider the first three energy levels for an electron in a helium ion.  
1st energy level : −6.41 × 10−19 J  
2nd energy level : −1.60 × 10−19 J  
3rd energy level : −0.72 × 10−19 J  
A 413 nm photon interacts with the ion. What might happen as a result of this in- teraction?

1. An electron could be excited from the 2nd to 3rd energy level.
2. An electron could be excited from the 1st to 3rd energy level.
3. None of the transitions listed would occur.
4. An electron could be excited from the 1st to 2nd energy level. **correct**

---

Which of the following is NOT correctly matched name to formula

1. diselenium oxide SeO2 **correct**
2. phosphorus pentachloride PCl5 3. sulfur trioxide SO3
4. carbon tetrachloride CCl4
5. dinitrogen pentoxide N2O5

**Explanation:**  
SeO2 is selenium dioxide.  
The prefix lable ”di” is misplaced in the answer indicating a ratio of 2:1 Se to O.

---

The oxygen/oxygen bond in O2 is stronger than in HOOH because

1. the oxygen/oxygen bond in O2 is more polar than in HOOH.
2. O2 has a oxygen/oxygen double bond and HOOH has a oxygen/oxygen single bond. **correct**
3. O2 has only one structure, while HOOH has a resonance structure that weakens the bond.
4. O2 has an oxygen/oxgyen triple bond where HOOH has an oxygen/oxygen double bond.
5. O2 has a resonance structure that pro- vides extra stability compared to the HOOH which has only one contributing structure.
6. the oxygen/oxygen bond in O2 is less polar than in HOOH.

**Explanation:**  
The Lewis dot structure of O2 shows it has a oxygen/oxygen double bond. HOOH only has a oxygen/oxygen single bond.

---

Which of the following species is isoelectronic with S2− ?

1. Br−
2. As3−
3. Rb+
4. Mg2+
5. Ar **correct**

**Explanation:**  
Isoelectronic means ‘has the same number of electrons as’. Locate each element in the Periodic Table. The atomic number will give the number of protons, which equals the number of electrons for the neutral atom; for an ion, you will have to add or subtract from this value.

---

Let X be a hypothetical element.  
Which of the following would be largest?

1. X2+
2. X−
3. X2− **correct**
4. X
5. X+

**Explanation:**  
X2− would be largest as it has 2 more electrons than protons, and the protons here would be at the greatest disadvantage when trying to draw the electrons towards the nucleus.

---

Cobalt-60 (60 27 Co) is an artificial radioisotope that is produced in a nuclear reactor for use as a gamma-ray source in the treatment of certain types of cancer. If the wavelength of the gamma radiation from a cobalt-60 source is 1.00 × 10−3 nm, calculate the energy of a photon of this radiation.

1. 2.0 × 10−13 J **correct** 
2. 2.0 × 10−16 J
3. 2.0 × 10−19 J
4. 6.4 × 10−14 J
5. None of these
6. 6.63 × 10−34 J
7. 6.4 × 10−10 J

**Explanation:**  
λ = 1.00 × 10−3 nm  
Ephoton = ?  

Ephoton = h ν = hc / λ  
= (6.626 × 10−34 J · s)(3.0 × 108 m/s) / (1.00 × 10−3 nm)(10−9 m/nm)  
= 2.0 × 10−13 J

---

An electron in a hydrogen atom moves from the n = 2 to n = 5 level. What is the wavelength of the photon that corresponds to this transition and is the photon emitted or absorbed during this process?

1. 276 nm; absorbed
2. 1875 nm; absorbed
3. 1875 nm; emitted
4. 434 nm; emitted
5. 434 nm; absorbed **correct**
6. 276 nm; emitted

---

Which of the following is correct with respect to the photoelectric effect?

1. A plot of the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons versus the frequency of the incident radiation has a slope that is equal to the value of the work function.
2. The kinetic energy of the ejected electrons increases with the intensity of the incident radiation.
3. A plot of the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons versus the frequency of the incident radiation is linear. **correct**
4. All metals have the same work function.

**Explanation:**  
The photoelectric effect is summarized by  
KE=hν−φ, which fits the standard equation for a line :  
y=mx−c,  
where φ is the work function of the metal, and varies for different metals. The intensity of the incident radiation does not show here as it is just the number of photons hitting a surface in a given time.  

---

You shine white light through a sample of neon atoms and then through a holographic diffraction grating. From this experiment, you would expect to observe  

1. mostly black space with thin lines of color.
2. a continuous spectrum broken by thin black lines. **correct**
3. a continuous spectrum.

---

Phosphorus has a higher ionization energy than silicon because

1. False; phosphorus has a lower ionization energy than silicon.
2. the outer orbitals of phosphorus are located closer to the nucleus than the outer orbitals of silicon.
3. the effective nuclear charge of phosphorus is less than that of silicon.
4. the outer orbitals of phosphorus are located farther from the nucleus than the outer orbitals of silicon.
5. the effective nuclear charge of silicon is less than that of phosphorus. **correct**

---

Which of the following will not have ionic bonds?

1. NaCl
2. methane (CH4) **correct**
3. calcium oxide
4. KBr
5. magnesium chloride

**Explanation:**  
All of the options except CH4 have ionic bonds, which are formed between metals and nonmetals. CH4 has only covalent (nonmetal-nonmetal) bonds.

---

Any neutral atom having an odd (i.e., uneven) atomic number must be

1. metallic.
2. non-magnetic.
3. paramagnetic. **correct**
4. inert.
5. a transition element.

---






